Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Harry Harrison has made a name for himself
in science fiction in many areas. He's noted for his novels, short stories, and
the anthologies he's edited. One of Harrison's notable contributions is the
popularization of so-called adventure science fiction. It's typified by the
trilogy whose volumes are aptly named Death World 1, Death World 2, and Death
World 3. Harrison told us how this particular brand of science fiction
originated with the writing of Death World 1. You mentioned the fact that it's
adventure science fiction. Well, don't laugh, but at that time in science
fiction, which was Campbell, which was Analog, if you were a true blue reader,
well, you read Startling Stories and Thrilling Wonder, because you had to wait
another three weeks for the next issue of Astounding. That's where the action
was. And he had a very cerebral. He had a whole novel of people talking to each
other, nothing moving at all, no action. And I wanted to do a book that had
action part of the plot. I mean, that's sort of stupid to say now, with all the
guns blowing heads away. I mean, that whole gore school and the whole sword and
sorcery, sword and butchery. I mean, action galore for no reason at all. But in
those days, it was getting dim, I thought. So I worked out, but I didn't want to
do an action plot for action, say. So I'm a great backplotter. In the sense, I
find a reason to do a book and then fit a book to the reason. And the reason I
wanted to have the action, I wanted to have a realistic, so I thought it was
Superman.
And in this book, you find, if you look at it closely, it's done in two or three
levels. The action plots are surface. But there, below that, is the idea of
Superman that Nietzsche talked about and that Superman magazine talks about. And
I'm very much against Superman, physical Superman. And if you look in the book,
you'll see that if you are so brutalized to be physically a Superman, your
intellectual content is zero. And I said that in a number of different ways. And
I'm very much against militarism. And that's sitting there in a number of
different ways. All of it couched in an adventure plot. And it's up to the
reader to read it whichever way he wants. And he'll find a good adventure plot
if he wants. He'll find even more about it. I remember when I first published
it, a reader in England came up to me. And I was looking for a great return from
literate Englishmen about heavily intellectual content. And he said, oh, Harry,
I read that book. I told my friends to read it. Oh, I like it. You did? What did
you tell me? He said, oh, really? I said, it's all about guns.
The protagonist of Death World 1 is Jason dinAlt. Harrison liked him so much
that he had to write two more installments. The Death World 2 and 3 came out by
happenstance. It's just that the character was successful. I wanted to write
another adventure-style book. And I realized after I wrote it, I left the ending
open. You had to get these people off that planet. A certain part of them had to
leave. They're just good for killing things. You start thinking about it. And
they're friends with his. And he's a weak man personally. And he has, like I
say, he supplies a part that they don't supply. They have the big bodies and the
tiny, poignant heads. He's a weakling in their terms, but he's a man of
intelligence. So therefore, I said, gee, well, if I went to another planet, he
had a problem. He'd have to go along and organize it. And then the plot
developed. I did that once more. And that was the end of it, as far as I was
concerned. People asked for another Death World. No, I run that particular plot
device. Well, I was pinned into it. And it worked three times. It worked pretty
well. Harrison told us his books usually have philosophical content. Death World
2, for instance. Okay, Death World 2, you may think it's about going off and
blowing things up and killing things and rushing around. It really is. The
entire book is about the difference in meaning. Between ethics and ethos. And
that's what it's about. I keep repeating over and over through that thing. And a
lot of guns go off and a lot of good things happen. You learn a bit of
Esperanto. But also, what science fiction can do, it's a book that takes the
study of a philosophical question or a problem of meaning of meaning. We'll have
more with Harry Harrison on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show. A production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. One of science fiction writer Harry
Harrison's most unforgettable characters is Slippery Jim diGriz, the
stainless steel rat. The stainless steel rat's adventure span five novels so
far. We asked Harrison where he got the concept of a stainless steel rat. I
remember the basic idea. It was just that, as the old rat says, that we have,
you know, flesh and blood rats in wooden buildings. We'll have stainless steel
rats in concrete ones. Then Harrison went on to tell us a bit about the first
novel in the series, The Stainless Steel Rat, and how the idea then grew. It's
basically a very old idea of the villain as hero. Turn the world on his head.
This is where you have in The Saint, who tends to pontificate a little bit too
much. It's where you have Rupert of Hentzau in that Prisoner of Zenda. We all
love him better than we do. The goody-goodies do their job. It is, if you'll
pardon the expression, my dear friend Kingsley Amis had a picaresque novel. Now,
don't be ashamed if you don't understand what that means. I said, thanks,
Kingsley. I ran off to a dictionary. The picaresque novel is just that. The hero
as villain, villain as hero. And when I realized that what I was doing, that I'd
come onto a formula, and I was trying to get humor into it as well. There was no
humor in science fiction. It's nothing that I was doing. Anyone else alive? A
character developed as it went along, and I get clues back from readers about
it. And an English reader told me he likes to read the thing because the hero
does all the things he wished he could do against society and gets away with it.
You know, everyone hates bureaucracy. And I said, by God, you're right. I
thought about it in the very next rat book. The first chapter has nothing to do
with the rest of the book if you look at it. It's just something happens to his
dear wife, Angelina, and the enemy has her, and he goes off. The enemy is the
Internal Review Service, the old IRS man, you know. He goes and burns out all
the income tax records for the whole planet, cheering everybody up, you know.
And the story begins. But that's something we all wish could happen tomorrow,
except for the people who work for the IRS. The stainless steel rat novels form
a humorous adventure series. We ask Harrison what place humor has in science
fiction. Very little. It could have a bigger one. And the answer is a very
mechanical one. Editors, for the most part, are dummies. And even the few bright
ones have their own particular taste in humor. That is a matter of taste. You
bring an adventure novel in, an editor will say, Yeah, well, Harry's done
better, but it moves along, people are killed, I'll buy it. Bring a love story
in, oh, well, your girl gets kissed, you know, it's a little boring, but I'll
buy it. You bring in a humor novel, he doesn't laugh. He does not buy it. And
editors, if they laugh, I've heard them say, One of them is a rejecter, it was
too funny. They're afraid the readers won't laugh. So the only way you can sell
humor is have a reputation as a humor writer. And how do you get a humor writer?
You've got to sell a book, but you can't sell it. It's a Catch-22 thing. And I
snuck it in The Stainless Street Rat. I would make each one a little bit funnier
than the one before. And eventually, the editor was laughing, readers were
laughing, hurrah, I'm a humor writer. Harrison's early characters, Jason dinAlt
and Slippery Jim diGriz, are strong characters. But Harrison told us science
fiction is really based on ideas, not characters. Science fiction is not a
character-based form of fiction. You can have three-dimensional characters in
science fiction. But the idea comes first. It's an idea fiction. To form a
fiction where you can have the idea as hero, anything that has that, isn't what
you call three-dimensional, have the idea for a character who would do these
things. Which means far too often in science fiction, you'll get two-dimensional
characters who just act the assigned role of the plot, given by the author. And
we don't mind reading that. We really want to read about the action. To make
good science fiction viable, interesting, fun science fiction, when you have to
assign the character the role, you must build his character as a character.
That's where the art comes. There are two things in all kinds of fiction. The
craft of science fiction, constructing your plot. The art of science fiction is
making your characters three-dimensional. Which is true for any character I
write. But very rarely in science fiction do you have character-based fiction.
If you have, it's usually not science fiction. More with Harry Harrison on our
next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Perhaps science fiction author Harry
Harrison's single most famous novel is Bill, the Galactic Hero. The protagonist
is Bill, a hayseed from the farm who gets Shanghai'd into the Empire Space Corps
to fight the evil Chingers. Bill, the Galactic Hero is a spoof of war,
bureaucracy, and the pulps, among other things. Here, Harrison comments on some
of the influences which helped inspire the novel. Bill, the Galactic Hero, there
again, he was assigned a role. He was, you know, a good soldier, Shveik. He's
the guy who gets it in the neck all the time, and happened to be a science
fiction army. And I think it just makes it explode in me. Having been in the
army and seated here in the heart of the military, I'm an enlisted man. I have
the highest rank in the army, that of sergeant. You have to get the general
before you get anything higher than that. Second lieutenant, you know, grubs to
be walked on. And it's a whole different attitude. And the officers like the
military. They like to tell people what to do. And usually what they tell them
to do is not for the good of the people they're talking to. They should get
killed for it. But the enlisted men want to stay alive. As Yossarian said in
Catch-22, they're trying to kill me. He didn't mean the enemy. He meant the army
he was in. And knowing all this, reading all this, Catch-22 came out. I was a
great fan of Candide. And when I saw Catch-22, what he did, Heller did, he
showed that there's something so awful that you have to laugh at them to
understand them. If you're doing a military novel, you say blood, blood, death,
intestines from the trees. By the 20th time you hang the intestines from the
trees, you're tired of looking at them. They look like spaghetti after a while.
Repetition of horror doesn't make horror. And that's all you can do. The army is
utterly horrible, boring, and wasteful. The military life is boring and
wasteful.
And in there, I parodied a few other novels just for fun of it. But the thing
that goes right through it is understanding the military. Years later I
discovered that. I had a Korean War veteran come up to me. He was a combat
Marine. He wanted to have his face all shot away. And I said, Yeah, huh, huh? I
said, Yes, yeah. He said, You wrote Bill, the Galactic Hero? I said, Yes, looking
for a chair to hide behind. He said, I've got a copy of every edition of that
book. I carry it through to combat, you know. And that tells a story. Another
guy, same thing, John Paul. He was a real Green Beret. He had a bangle. He
worked with the Montagnards. Not like John Wayne with a fake one. You know, he
was up there. And he killed things. He had great killing. And, uh, it was like,
you know, Napoleon's troops carried a Marshall's baton in their pack. He carried
a copy of Bill, the Galactic Hero. All through the Korean War, up there, killing gooks
and everything. And he used to get his rookies in. He'd read them a chapter
every night. Whether they liked it or no. He'd break them in half, you know. So,
I really feel that it's humor and it's parody and it's a lot of fun. But it
tells you something about the military condition that is absolutely dead true.
In fact, Harrison believes his version of war, as depicted in Bill, the Galactic
Hero, comes closer to reality than do the more serious novels of others. The pro
-military novel is like Starship Troopers, you know, where everyone's being kind
to each other. I mean, if, uh, in fact, I saw Norman Spinrad put it in an
article the other week, uh, as Harry Harrison said, it looked like it's always
Bobby or Buddy Week. And this was, um, we said in the Army, in, a novel whose
name I shall not mention, the guy in a heavy space armor is going down and all
friends come to rescue him, you know. And, uh, in Bill, the guy goes in a swamp
and the soldiers are marching by, he says, help me, help me, and they walk on
by, he says, what is this? Bob, your Buddy Week! And they say, it's always Bob,
your Buddy Week! And that's what you should say in the Army, you know. I mean,
uh, uh, it always is. It's every man for himself. Normally, normally. You expect
to get it put in and broken off, and usually it does. We'll have more with Harry
Harrison on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Harry Harrison is noted for his humorous
science fiction works as well as his adventure science fiction. Right. But
Harrison wrote the very serious novel, Make Room, Make Room, which portrays a
grim, near-future earth plagued with overpopulation. Some may be more familiar
with the movie loosely based on this novel, Soylent Green. Harrison's concern
for overpopulation inspired his writing, Make Room, Make Room. His primary
concern while writing was to avoid both lecturing and preaching. And I felt very
serious about population. At that time, I wrote the book. There were no
fictional works on population. There were no, these popular nonfiction books
hadn't come out. The world was completely unaware where we were going. And I
could see it. I lived in Mexico and watched what was happening. You read the
learned journals. They told you about it. So I wanted to do a propaganda work
that was disguised as not being propaganda. And so I set it in the year 1999 New
York. Makes a millennial novel. Brings a lot of overtones, you know, the
millennium, coming of Christ, and that sort of thing. And I didn't want to
lecture. So I very simply started a book, put the characters in the world, went
along for almost a fifth of the book, and got everyone involved before someone
turned to one character, the older character. How did the world get this way? At
this point, I felt the reader was trapped enough to take one page of lecture.
And I sent the book in my head and said, Harry, they're trapped enough to take
four pages of lecture. So I just put in four pages, a copy, about a thousand
words, two pages in the book, telling you how it worked out that way. So my one
little lecture right there, having done that little lecture, the book was, in a
sense, a work of propaganda and art. If you're better at the art, the better at
the propaganda. 1984 is propaganda. On the beach is propaganda. They're both
art. You get the message. And that was it. And after that, I worked around the
point. And if you were alive and warm, you understood it. And the readers did.
Harrison worked hard to involve the reader by painting a picture of the future
using indirect descriptions rather than simply telling the reader the situation
directly. I think, having worked as an artist for a number of years, I see in my
mind when I'm writing, I have a stage of people walking around and I see what's
in the background, the foreground. I hear the waves splashing and see them
splashing.
And as always in writing, you should never tell you should show. And good
writing is hard work. It should be transparent. The reader should not see how
you got the effect. And one of the best ways, of course, it's hard to do is
never say. The world is full of a lot of people. Never say you're short of
water. Show them on a line to get water out of a standpipe. And then you know
you're short of water and dramatize their need for the water. And this is where
your art comes in,
which far too often, if the writer cannot do that, then he does not succeed on
that level. People read his book for fun, but if you can get the reader
emotionally involved, get him trapped into the book, and he comes out of the end
maybe not agreeing with you, but at least he knows what you said. He will be
thinking about it. And I had one note. One girl read that book in New York. She
said, if I thought the world would be like that, I'd commit suicide. I said,
don't, don't. The mere act of thinking that means you're going to vote right and
work so this world will not appear. That's a science fiction admonishing finger
again, saying shape up or ship out. If you don't do this, you'll get that. Make
Room, Make Room is also a mystery novel. Harrison chose this vehicle because it
allowed him to show society from bottom to top. All of science fiction, for the
most part, is based on detective plot. The mystery will be solved. Even if
they're not called, like Hal Clements' Needle, not officially a mystery, you
want to find how you got that way. Will they solve the problem? Will they all
live? Will they get all this world? Will they do it? That was a deliberate bit
of my plot, a plot device of mine, that I wanted to show society from the lowest
levels to the high. I wanted to show how everybody lived in that world. So I
used a very simple device of having a detective as protagonist. A very simple
story. And we all knew at the beginning who did the murder. We knew what was
going to happen. And it was not important, but it was a device to move the story
along. And like most crimes in New York, 90% aren't solved. It's just by chance
that they are. This was a way of getting you into the various levels of the
stratus of society. On our next show, we'll talk about Soylent Green.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Make Room, Make Room. Harry Harrison's grim
novel of an overpopulated near-future New York was the basis for the movie
Soylent Green. This movie made its appearance in the early 1970s, and it starred
Charlton Heston and Edward G. Robinson. One of the movie's claims to fame is
that it was the last motion picture Edward G. Robinson played in. We spoke with
Harrison about the transformation of the novel to the movie, and we were
particularly interested how the movie came to be plotted around cannibalism,
whereas this was never mentioned in the novel. Harrison told us an interesting
story which vividly shows how things apparently work in Hollywood. The first
time I heard about the fact they wanted to make a film out of this book was when
I was approached for a contract, and I signed it. And then it turned out the
firm that bought it was a front for MGM, and they sold MGM for $1. They hate to
pay the writer a decent fee. For some reason, they pay everyone else. They don't
like to pay writers in Hollywood. And it turned out that the producer, Walter
Seltzer, and the lead actor, Chuck Heston, had been trying to sell to MGM for
five years, and they couldn't sell. MGM thought that overpopulation wasn't
important enough to do a film on. So they then got a moronic screenwriter who
put in cannibalism. He thought they'd eat that up at MGM. And they did. They
thought it'd be a great idea for a film. So it was bought as a cannibalism film.
And I saw the screenplay, and it was pretty atrocious, and I could not do
anything. By contract, I couldn't change one word. So what I did do, I kept
saying a memo of what was wrong physically, how it could not work. And they made
a lot of changes. I went down the set and pointed out things that hadn't been
done. And I gave copies of the book to all the actors and all the technical
people, and they got very interested. And I talked to Eddie Robinson. I remember
he talked to Dick Fleischer. I heard him say, I don't understand who I'm
supposed to be. What is this role? And there's no way of telling that rotten
screenplay what it was. So I asked if I could talk to him. I introduced myself.
And we had lunch. I said, I wrote the book. Oh, that's very interesting. The
literate man, the art collector, you know. I explained that in the book, in the
year 2000, that is me, my army record, my age. Here or there, not here, the old
man, is the only person who knew the good world. That's his playing. He said,
the only person who lived when the world was green. He said, that's a good idea.
That's not bad. Having got that much, he went away and acted. A lot of that was
created on camera, interfaced between the director and the actors. And I like to
think myself, that I was there all the time. And I like to feel, A, it was my
book. And B, if there was some worth in the film, I helped to add to it.
One of the lead characters, the old man Saul, played by Robinson, is actually
Harrison in 1999, as he mentioned. Here he explains. To keep him as a three
-dimensional character, I just use myself. Well, I'll be at that age. I don't
want to live in that world. That's why I wrote the book. I do not want to be
that person at that time.
Although the plot of Make Room, Make Room was significantly altered in Soylent
Green, Harrison told us that on the whole, he is pleased with the movie. The
technical people were so tremendous, and the acting was so good. And it does
what science fiction does so well, background as foreground. You go to see it,
it's a stupid little detective plot, and you know it's going to be bodies made
in Soylent Green. And then about a week later, you start thinking about that
horrible world, that green world you're living in. My God. And it succeeds in
that play. It's sort of a shocker, an emotional shocker. It works. I think it
works pretty well as a film. There have been no complaints. It's the only film
MGM made money on that year. That was the year of the Great Walls, a bomb that
cost $14 million and grossed $500,000. So MGM should be happy, and the rest of
them should be happy. I can't complain. Be sure to catch Soylent Green next time
it plays on late-night television.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.